feat(AIP-130): adding method AIP (#1059)
googleapis/aip: aip/general/0130.md

---
id: 130
state: draft
created: 2023-03-313
updated: 2023-03-313
placement:
  category: operations
  order: 9
---

# Methods

> Methods are conceptually synonymous with

Reviewer: I know this is just a draft but...can you finish the sentence? The suspense is killing me!

Author: sorry! should have reviewed better. will do.

## Guidance

### Categories of Methods

The following enumerates multiple categories of methods that exist, often
grouped up under some object (e.g. collection or resource) that the method
operates upon.

> | Category Name                      | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Related AIPs                                       | [IaC][]                         | CLIs        | UIs         | SDKs        |

Author: I know this formatting is *really* hard to read. I'd love some suggestions on how to author a more legible markdown table.

Reviewer 2: I just view the rendered file.

| ---------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | -------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- | --------------- | -------------- | --------------- |
| **Collection-oriented**            |                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                    |                                 |                 |                |                 |
| Standard collection methods        | Operate on a collection of resources (List or Create).                                                                                                                                                       | [AIP-121][], [AIP-132][], [AIP-133][]              | automatable                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

> | Batch resource methods             | Fetch or mutate on multiple singular resources in a collection.                                                                                                                                              | [AIP-231][], [AIP-233][], [AIP-234][], [AIP-235][] | may be used to optimize queries | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Batch resource methods             | Fetch or mutate multiple resources in a collection by name.                                                                                                                                              | [AIP-231][], [AIP-233][], [AIP-234][], [AIP-235][] | may be used to optimize queries | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
```

| Custom collection fetch methods    | Fetch information across a collection that cannot be expressed via a standard method.                                                                                                                        | [AIP-136][]                                        | automatable                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

> | Custom collection mutation methods | Perform an imperative operation referencing a collection that may mutate one or more resources within that collection in fashion that cannot be easily achieve by standard methods (e.g. state transitions). | [AIP-136][]                                        | handwritten                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Custom collection mutation methods | Perform an imperative operation referencing a collection that may mutate one or more resources within that collection in fashion that cannot be easily achieved by standard methods (e.g. state transitions). | [AIP-136][]                                        | handwritten                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
```

| **Resource-oriented**              |                                                                                                                                                                                                              |                                                    |                                 |                 |                |                 |
| Standard resource methods          | Fetch or mutate a single resource (Get, Update, Delete).                                                                                                                                                     | [AIP-121][], [AIP-131][], [AIP-134][], [AIP-135][] | automatable                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

> | Custom resource fetch methods      | Fetch information across a single resource that cannot be expressed via a standard method.                                                                                                                   | [AIP-136][]                                        | automatable                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Custom resource fetch methods      | Fetch information for a single resource that cannot be expressed via a standard method.                                                                                                                   | [AIP-136][]                                        | automatable                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
```

| Custom resource fetch methods      | Fetch information for a single resource that cannot be expressed via a standard method.                                                                                                                       | [AIP-136][]                                        | automatable                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
| Custom resource mutation methods   | Perform an imperative operation on a resource that may mutate it in a way a standard method cannot (e.g. state transitions).                                                                                  | [AIP-136][]                                        | handwritten                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

> | **None of the above**              |                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                    |                                 |                 |                |                 |

Reviewer 2: There are some categories of methods that are omitted:
* Aggregated list methods: automatable except for IaC, where they are not useful
* Snapshot/backup/commit and copy/restore/rollback custom methods are not really usable for IaC
* Resource rename methods are not usable for IaC
* Data-plane methods, including resourceless methods

Author: I was trying to avoid the "data-plane" term since I'm not sure that is descriptive enough as to the intent of the method, and since some things (e.g. snapshot) could be considered data-plane as well.

I can add the other ones though. I view the snapshot / backup / commit ones as more in the category of "mutation custom methods", so maybe it's worth having a whole category for that?

Author: re resourceless methods - I'm not convinced such a concept should exist. At least for GCP, everything should be done in the context of an org / folder / project. 

Although I guess categorically this refers to the more computational RPCs (e.g. speech to text)?

I could add it here, but we would need to clarify this with an AIP on that specifically I think.

Reviewer 2: The management vs. data-plane distinction is important, as we've been discussing. It's mentioned in AIP 128 (https://google.aip.dev/128#guidance) but I don't think it's discussed in AIP 136. We probably need a dedicated AIP on that topic, so I don't think we need a lot of detail here, but this document seems to assume it's talking about only the management plane without saying so.

Resourceless methods are called stateless methods in AIP 136: https://google.aip.dev/136#stateless-methods. Resources often have user data attached to them, like a storage object, database table, VM memory, etc. and provide data-plane methods to write and read that data. Resourceless/stateless methods operate on data attached to other resources, such as storage objects. I believe the concept does make sense. They are pure functions, essentially. How we map the concept to an API pattern is another issue. Such a method may have an explicit parent for authorization, policy, billing, and regionalization purposes. If we want to require an explicit resource even in the case that there is no persistent state associated with the service, it would be a singleton, however we decide to represent those, so I'd suggest we tackle singleton first, then stateless methods.

Author: > The management vs. data-plane distinction is important, as we've been discussing. It's mentioned in AIP 128 (https://google.aip.dev/128#guidance) but I don't think it's discussed in AIP 136. We probably need a dedicated AIP on that topic, so I don't think we need a lot of detail here, but this document seems to assume it's talking about only the management plane without saying so.

I do agree we need to tackle management plane vs data plane, but I'm not sure about the right way to express that in this document. resource-oriented CRUDL also exists in data plane as well. 

If we do tackle the discussion of the plane, I think it makes sense to do so in this AIP.

> Resourceless methods are called stateless methods in AIP 136: https://google.aip.dev/136#stateless-methods.

Ack, I'll add a line for stateless methods. I think it's a good point that how we categorize the method and how the method is expressed via HTTP are two separate concerns. 

I don't know if I view it as a singleton though: operations on a singleton mutate data, while stateless methods do not.

> | Streaming methods                  | Methods that communicate bi-directionally.                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                    | handwritten                     | handwritten     | handwritten    | automatable     |

Reviewer: I don't think `Streaming methods` should be limited to bi-directional, because there is `client-stream` and `server-stream` as well. Folks will get hung up on that if they have proto/grpc experience.

Author: ack. Do you have a suggested way to state that? we could be general and say "methods that communicate via streaming" but that definition feels a little cyclic.

> ### Preferred method of using methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Choosing a method category
```

> Given the above categories, API authors should prefer to use the following categories, in order of preference:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While designing a method, API authors should choose from the defined categories in the following order:
```

1. Streaming methods

## Rationale

Resource-oriented standard and custom methods are recommended first, as they can
be expressed in the widest variety of clients (IaC, CLIs, UIs, and so on), and
offer the most uniform experience that allows users to apply their knowledge of
one API to another.

If a standard method is unsuitable, then custom methods (that are mounted to a
resource or collection) offer a lesser, but still valuable level of consistency,
helping the user reason about the scope of the action and the object whose
configuration is read to inform that action. Although mutative custom methods
are not uniform enough to have a automated integration with exclusively
resource-oriented clients such as [IaC][] clients, they are still a pattern that
can easily recognized by CLIs, UIs, and SDKs.

If one cannot express their APIs in a resource-oriented fashion at all, then the
operation falls in a category where the lack of uniformity makes it difficult
for any client aside from SDKs to model the operation. This category is
preferred last due to the fact that a user cannot rely on their knowledge of
similar APIs, as well as the issue that integration with many clients will

> likely have to be hand-writtenl.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
likely have to be hand-written.
```

> As outlined in [AIP-121][],

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As outlined in [AIP-121][], resources rock and every one should use them.
```

Can you finish this sentence too? :)

Author: ack.

| Batch resource methods             | Fetch or mutate multiple resources in a collection by name.                                                                                                                                                   | [AIP-231][], [AIP-233][], [AIP-234][], [AIP-235][] | may be used to optimize queries | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
| Aggregated list methods            | Fetch or mutate multiple resources of the same type across multiple collections.                                                                                                                              | [AIP-159][]                                        | not useful nor automable        | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
| **Custom Fetch Methods**           |                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                    |                                 |                 |                |                 |

> | Custom collection fetch methods    | Fetch information across a collection that cannot be expressed via a standard method.                                                                                                                         | [AIP-136][]                                        | automatable                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

Reviewer 2: Are custom collection and resource fetch methods automatable in Terraform? Is there an example of this now?

Author: I was imagining that any custom fetch method could become a Terraform data source (the request parameters would be the resource itself).

But I can check with the Terraform team. But I guess to be on the safe side I'll put this in "handwritten".

| **Custom Mutation Methods**        |                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                    |                                 |                 |                |                 |
| Backing up a resource              | Storing a copy of a resource at a particular point in time.                                                                                                                                                   | [AIP-162][]                                        | unused or handwritten           | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
| Restoring a resource               | Setting a resource to a version from a particular point in time.                                                                                                                                              | [AIP-162][]                                        | unused or handwritten           | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

> | Renaming a resource                | Modify the resource's name or id while preserving configuration and state.                                                                                                                                    | [AIP-136][]                                        | unused or handwritten           | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |

Reviewer 2: I suggest "data" rather than "state" since "state" has a particular meaning in AIP 216.

Author: ack, agreed.

be expressed in the widest variety of clients (IaC, CLIs, UIs, and so on), and
offer the most uniform experience that allows users to apply their knowledge of
one API to another.

If a standard method is unsuitable, then custom methods (that are mounted to a
resource or collection) offer a lesser, but still valuable level of consistency,
helping the user reason about the scope of the action and the object whose
configuration is read to inform that action. Although mutative custom methods
are not uniform enough to have a automated integration with exclusively
resource-oriented clients such as [IaC][] clients, they are still a pattern that
can easily recognized by CLIs, UIs, and SDKs.

If one cannot express their APIs in a resource-oriented fashion at all, then the
operation falls in a category where the lack of uniformity makes it difficult
for any client aside from SDKs to model the operation. This category is
preferred last due to the fact that a user cannot rely on their knowledge of
similar APIs, as well as the issue that integration with many clients will
likely have to be hand-written.

[AIP-121]: ./0121.md

> [AIP-132]: ./0132.md

Reviewer 2: AIP-131 is missing

[AIP-133]: ./0133.md
[AIP-134]: ./0134.md
[AIP-135]: ./0135.md
[AIP-136]: ./0136.md
[AIP-159]: ./0159.md

> [AIP-231]: ./0231.md

Reviewer 2: AIP 162 is missing. It's easy to see if you view the markdown.

Author: ack, thanks!

| Custom collection mutation methods | Perform an imperative operation referencing a collection that may mutate one or more resources within that collection in fashion that cannot be easily achieved by standard methods (e.g. state transitions). | [AIP-136][]                                        | unused or handwritten           | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
| Custom resource mutation methods   | Perform an imperative operation on a resource that may mutate it in a way a standard method cannot (e.g. state transitions).                                                                                  | [AIP-136][]                                        | unused or handwritten           | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
| **Misc Custom Methods**            |                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                    |                                 |                 |                |

> | Stateless Methods                  | A method that has no permanent effect on any data within the API (e.g. translating text)                                                                                                                      | [AIP-136][]                                        | unused or handwritten           | automatable     | automtable     | automatable     |

Reviewer 2: typo: automtable

Author: done!

| Custom resource fetch methods      | Fetch information for a single resource that cannot be expressed via a standard method.                                                                                                                       | [AIP-136][]                                        | automatable                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
| Custom resource mutation methods   | Perform an imperative operation on a resource that may mutate it in a way a standard method cannot (e.g. state transitions).                                                                                  | [AIP-136][]                                        | handwritten                     | automatable     | automatable    | automatable     |
| **None of the above**              |                                                                                                                                                                                                               |                                                    |                                 |                 |                |                 |

> | Streaming methods                  | Methods that communicate bi-directionally.                                                                                                                                                                    |                                                    | handwritten                     | handwritten     | handwritten    | automatable     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Streaming methods                  | Methods that communicate via client, server, or bi-directional streams.                                                                                                                                                                   |                                                    | handwritten                     | handwritten     | handwritten    | automatable     |
```

Not that great of a suggestion, but at least it covers the bases? 😅

Author: agreed! we can always improve it: this AIP is in draft state for now.
